GANG OF FOUR
-------------------------

The Gang of Four (GoF) refers to the four authors who wrote the influential book that introduced many of the classic software design patterns.

Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software

The four authors are:

Erich Gamma
Richard Helm
Ralph Johnson
John Vlissides

Because there were four of them, they became known as the Gang of Four (GoF).

Why are they important?

Before their book, developers often solved common design problems repeatedly in different ways.

The GoF documented 23 proven design patterns that could be reused across object-oriented software.

The 3 main categories of design patterns are:
----------------------------------------------

Creating objects → Connecting objects → Communicating between objects

Category	       Fundamental Question	                            Simple Meaning
Creational	      How do I create objects?	                        Object creation
Structural	    How do I connect/organize objects?	                Object structure
Behavioral	   How do objects communicate and work together?	    Object interaction

🏗️ 1. Creational Patterns = CREATE

Problem:

How should I create this object?

Instead of blindly doing:

var obj = new SomeClass();

Creational patterns provide better ways of controlling object creation.

Examples: Factory, Abstract Factory, Builder, Singleton, Prototype.

Memory word: CREATE

🧱 2. Structural Patterns = CONNECT

Now the objects already exist.

The question becomes:

How should I connect and organize these classes and objects?

Example:

Object A
   |
   ↓
Object B
   |
   ↓
Object C

Structural patterns help arrange them into a larger system.

Examples: Adapter, Decorator, Facade, Composite, Proxy, Bridge, Flyweight.

Memory word: CONNECT

🤝 3. Behavioral Patterns = COMMUNICATE

Now:

Objects are created.
Objects are connected.

The final question is:

How should these objects communicate and divide responsibilities?

Example:

Object A
   |
 sends request
   ↓
Object B
   |
 notifies
   ↓
Object C

Examples: Observer, Strategy, Command, State, Mediator, Chain of Responsibility, Visitor, Iterator, Template Method, Memento, Interpreter.

Memory word: COMMUNICATE

So remember the entire Gang of Four classification as the natural life cycle of objects:

CREATE
   ↓
CONNECT
   ↓
COMMUNICATE

Creational
   ↓
Structural
   ↓
Behavioral

My simplest one-line definition would be:

Creational patterns deal with how objects are created, Structural patterns deal with how objects are connected, and Behavioral patterns deal with how objects communicate and share responsibilities.

For your design-pattern notes, I would remember just CREATE → CONNECT → COMMUNICATE.


Examples include:

Creational Patterns
------------------------
Factory Method
Abstract Factory
Builder
Prototype
Singleton


Structural Patterns
-------------------------
Adapter
Bridge
Composite
Decorator
Facade
Flyweight
Proxy


Behavioral Patterns
-----------------------------
Observer
Strategy
State
Command
Mediator
Memento
Iterator
Template Method
Chain of Responsibility
Visitor
Interpreter
Simple Analogy

Think of the GoF book like a cookbook.

Before the cookbook:

Every chef invented recipes from scratch.

After the cookbook:

Chefs recognized common recipes and reused them.

Similarly, the GoF didn't invent object-oriented programming—they identified and documented common solutions to recurring software design problems.

Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"The Gang of Four are the four authors who documented the 23 classic object-oriented design patterns that are still widely used today."


BEHAVIORAL PATTERNS:(COMMUNICATION)
-------------------------------------

1. Memento pattern

The Memento Pattern is used to save an object's state so it can be restored later, without exposing its internal details.

It's like taking a snapshot before making changes.

Analogy: Video Game Save Point
You're playing a game and reach a save point.
The game saves your current progress.
If you lose later, you can load the saved game and continue from that point.

Mapping:

Originator: The game (current progress)
Memento: Saved game file (snapshot)
Caretaker: Save/Load system that stores the snapshot
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Take a snapshot now, so you can restore it later."

Real-world Examples
Undo/Redo in a text editor
Game save/load
Version history in a document editor

These all save a previous state so it can be restored later.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. State pattern

The State Pattern is used when an object's behavior changes based on its current state. Instead of using lots of if or switch statements, each state has its own behavior.

Analogy: Traffic Light

A traffic light behaves differently depending on its current state:

🟢 Green → Cars can go.
🟡 Yellow → Slow down.
🔴 Red → Stop.

The traffic light is the same object, but its behavior changes based on its state.

Mapping:

Context: Traffic Light
States: Green, Yellow, Red
Behavior: Go, Slow, Stop
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Same object, different behavior depending on its current state."

Real-world Examples
Media Player: Playing, Paused, Stopped
ATM: No Card, Card Inserted, PIN Verified
Document: Draft, Review, Published

The object's behavior changes as its state changes.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Strategy pattern

The Strategy Pattern is used when there are multiple ways to perform the same task, and you want to choose the appropriate algorithm or behavior at runtime.

Instead of hardcoding the logic with if/switch statements, each strategy is implemented separately.

Analogy: Google Maps

You want to travel from A to B.

Google Maps lets you choose:

🚗 Drive
🚶 Walk
🚲 Bicycle
🚌 Public Transport

The destination is the same, but the strategy (route calculation) changes based on your choice.

Mapping:

Context: Google Maps
Strategies: Drive, Walk, Bicycle, Public Transport
Task: Find the best route
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Same goal, different ways to achieve it—choose the strategy at runtime."

Real-world Examples
Payment methods: Credit Card, UPI, PayPal
Sorting algorithms: Quick Sort, Merge Sort, Bubble Sort
Compression: ZIP, RAR, 7Z

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Iterator pattern

The Iterator Pattern is used to access each element in a collection one by one without knowing how the collection is stored internally.

Analogy: TV Remote

You don't need to know how the TV stores its channels.

You simply press:

▶️ Next Channel
◀️ Previous Channel

The remote lets you iterate through the channels one at a time.

Mapping:

Collection: TV Channels
Iterator: TV Remote
Elements: Individual Channels
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Go through a collection one item at a time without knowing its internal structure."

Real-world Examples
foreach loop in C#
Iterating through a List<T>, Array, or Dictionary<TKey, TValue>
Database result sets
Easy C# Connection

When you write:

foreach (var item in list)
{
    Console.WriteLine(item);
}

You're using the Iterator Pattern. The foreach loop uses an iterator behind the scenes to move from one element to the next without you worrying about how the collection stores its data.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Command pattern

The Command Pattern is used to encapsulate a request or action as an object, so it can be passed around, queued, logged, or undone.

Instead of the caller performing the action directly, it creates a command object and asks it to execute.

Analogy: Restaurant
A customer places an order.
The waiter writes the order on a ticket (the command).
The chef prepares the food.

The customer doesn't talk directly to the chef. The waiter carries the command.

Mapping:

Client: Customer
Command: Order ticket
Invoker: Waiter
Receiver: Chef
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Turn a request into an object so it can be executed later or by someone else."

Real-world Examples
Undo/Redo in editors
Menu or toolbar button clicks
Task queues and job schedulers
Remote controls (each button is a command)
Easy C# Connection

When you click a "Save" button in an application:

The button doesn't save the file itself.
It invokes a SaveCommand, which knows how to perform the save operation.

This keeps the UI separate from the business logic.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Template pattern

The Template Method Pattern is used when multiple processes follow the same overall steps, but some of the individual steps are different.

The base class defines the overall workflow (the template), and derived classes customize specific steps.

Analogy: Making Tea vs Coffee

The overall process is the same:

Boil water
Add the main ingredient
Pour into a cup
Serve

The only difference is step 2:

🍵 Tea → Add tea leaves
☕ Coffee → Add coffee powder

The recipe (template) stays the same, but one step changes.

Mapping:

Template: Recipe
Concrete Implementations: Tea recipe, Coffee recipe
Variable Step: Add tea leaves or coffee powder
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Same process, but some steps are customized by subclasses."

Real-world Examples
Generating different report types (PDF, Excel)
Data import process for different file formats (CSV, XML)
Game characters following the same turn sequence but performing different actions
---------------------------------------------------------------
7. Observer pattern

The Observer Pattern is used when one object needs to notify multiple other objects whenever something changes.

Instead of the other objects constantly checking for updates, they subscribe once and are automatically notified when a change happens.

Analogy: YouTube Subscription
A YouTube channel uploads a new video.
Everyone who has subscribed gets a notification automatically.
The channel doesn't need to know who all the subscribers are—it simply publishes the new video.

Mapping:

Subject (Publisher): YouTube Channel
Observers: Subscribers
State Change: New video uploaded
Notification: YouTube notifies all subscribers
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"One object changes → everyone interested is automatically notified."


---------------------------------------------------------------------
8. Mediator pattern

The Mediator Pattern is used when multiple objects need to communicate with each other, but instead of talking directly, they communicate through a 
central mediator.

This reduces dependencies between objects and keeps them loosely coupled.

Analogy: Air Traffic Control
Multiple airplanes need to take off and land.
Instead of pilots talking directly to every other pilot, all communication goes through the Air Traffic Control (ATC).
The ATC coordinates everything and tells each plane what to do.

Mapping:

Mediator: Air Traffic Control
Colleagues: Airplanes
Communication: Through the ATC, not directly with each other
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Many objects communicate through one central coordinator instead of talking directly to each other."

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
9. Chain of Responsibility pattern

The Chain of Responsibility Pattern is used when multiple objects can handle a request, and the request is passed along a chain until one of them handles it.

Each object decides:

✅ "I can handle this."
❌ "I can't handle this, pass it to the next one."
Analogy: Customer Support Escalation

A customer has an issue.

Level 1 Support → Can't solve it? Pass to Level 2.
Level 2 Support → Can't solve it? Pass to Manager.
Manager → Resolves the issue.

The customer doesn't need to know who will solve it—the request moves through the chain until someone handles it.

Mapping:

Request: Customer issue
Handlers: Level 1 Support → Level 2 Support → Manager
Chain: The order in which the request is passed
Key Idea (One-line Memory Aid)

"Pass the request along until someone can handle it."

Real-world Examples
Customer support escalation
Expense approval (Manager → Director → CEO)
ASP.NET Core Middleware (each middleware handles or passes the request to the next)
Exception handling chains

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10. Visitor Pattern

The Visitor Pattern lets you add a new operation to a group of existing classes without modifying those classes.

One-line memory trick:
"Keep the objects the same, bring in different visitors to perform different tasks."

🏛️ Analogy: Museum Visitors

Imagine a museum.

The museum has exhibits:
Dinosaur
Painting
Sculpture

These exhibits don't change.

Now different visitors come:

👨‍🏫 Guide → Explains history
🧹 Cleaner → Cleans the exhibit
📸 Photographer → Takes pictures
📝 Inspector → Checks for damage

The same exhibit receives different visitors, each performing a different operation.

The exhibit itself doesn't need to know how to clean or inspect—it simply accepts the visitor.

In Code

Instead of writing:

dinosaur.Clean();
dinosaur.Inspect();
dinosaur.TakePhoto();

You write:

dinosaur.Accept(cleanerVisitor);
dinosaur.Accept(inspectorVisitor);
dinosaur.Accept(photoVisitor);

Each visitor performs its own logic.

Why use Visitor?

Suppose you already have many classes:

Circle
Rectangle
Triangle

Now your manager says:

"Add exporting to PDF."

Instead of modifying all three classes, create:

PdfExportVisitor

Tomorrow:

ExcelExportVisitor

Next month:

AreaCalculationVisitor

The existing shape classes remain unchanged.

Visitor Pattern allows adding new operations to existing object structures without modifying the object classes by placing the operation inside separate Visitor classes. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------
11. Interpreter Pattern

The Interpreter Pattern is used to understand and evaluate a language or expression based on a set of grammar rules.

One-line memory trick:
"Given a language, build an interpreter that understands it."

🗣️ Analogy: Language Translator

Imagine you travel to Japan.

You say:

"Hello"

A translator interprets it as:

"こんにちは"

Similarly, if you type:

2 + 3 * 4

An interpreter understands the symbols (2, +, 3, *, 4) according to mathematical grammar and evaluates the result:

14

The interpreter reads, understands, and executes the expression.

Another Programming Analogy

Suppose your application accepts commands like:

MOVE FORWARD
TURN LEFT
MOVE FORWARD

Instead of writing lots of if-else statements, you create an interpreter that understands these commands and executes them one by one.

In Code

Input:

ADD 10 20

Interpreter:

Reads ADD
Understands it means addition
Computes:
30
Where is it used?
SQL query parsers
Regular expression engines
Mathematical expression evaluators
Programming language compilers/interpreters
Rule engines
Command/script processors


STRUCTURAL PATTERNS:(CONNECTION)
-------------------------------------   

1. COMPOSITE PATTERN
------------------------
Composite Pattern allows you to treat a single object and a group of objects in the same way.

Analogy: Company Organization

Think of a company:

Company
│
├── Manager
│   ├── Employee
│   └── Employee
│
└── Manager
    ├── Employee
    └── Employee

Both an individual Employee and a Manager with multiple employees can be treated similarly.

For example:

GetSalary()
For an Employee → returns their salary.
For a Manager/Department → calculates the salaries of everyone under it.

The client doesn't need to worry whether it's dealing with one object or a group of objects.

Simple C# idea
public interface IEmployee
{
    void ShowDetails();
}

Individual object (Leaf):
------------------------------
public class Developer : IEmployee
{
    public void ShowDetails()
    {
        Console.WriteLine("Developer");
    }
}

Group of objects (Composite):
-------------------------------
public class Manager : IEmployee
{
    private List<IEmployee> employees = new();

    public void Add(IEmployee employee)
    {
        employees.Add(employee);
    }

    public void ShowDetails()
    {
        foreach(var employee in employees)
        {
            employee.ShowDetails();
        }
    }
}

The key idea is:

Developer ───────┐
                 ├── Both implement IEmployee
Manager ─────────┘
   │
   ├── Developer
   └── Developer

So the easiest way to remember it is:

Composite Pattern = Treat one object and a collection/tree of objects uniformly.


2. ADAPTER PATTERN
---------------------

The Adapter Pattern allows two incompatible classes or interfaces to work together by acting as a bridge between them.

One-line memory trick:
"Make incompatible things compatible."

🔌 Analogy: Power Plug Adapter

Imagine you travel from India to the US.

Your Indian charger has one type of plug.
The US wall socket has a different shape.

You use a travel adapter.

The adapter doesn't change the charger or the wall socket—it simply lets them work together.

Indian Charger → Adapter → US Socket

The adapter acts as a translator between two incompatible interfaces.


3. BRIDGE PATTERN
---------------------

The Bridge Pattern separates an abstraction from its implementation so that both can evolve independently.

One-line memory trick:
"Separate what it does from how it does it."

📺 Analogy: TV and Remote Control

Imagine you have:

Samsung TV
Sony TV
LG TV

And different remotes:

Basic Remote
Smart Remote
Voice Remote

Without the Bridge Pattern, you'd need classes like:

SamsungBasicRemote
SamsungSmartRemote
SamsungVoiceRemote
SonyBasicRemote
SonySmartRemote
SonyVoiceRemote
...

The number of classes keeps growing.

With the Bridge Pattern:

Remote  ─────────►  TV
                 (interface)
The Remote knows how to operate a TV.
The TV knows how to turn on, change channels, adjust volume.

Now you can mix and match:

Basic Remote + Samsung TV
Smart Remote + Sony TV
Voice Remote + LG TV

without creating new classes for every combination.


4. PROXY PATTERN
-------------------

The Proxy Pattern provides a substitute or middleman object that controls access to the real object.

One-line memory trick:
“Instead of accessing the real object directly, go through a proxy.”

🚪 Analogy: Security Guard

Imagine a company CEO’s office.

Visitor → Security Guard → CEO

You cannot directly enter the CEO’s office. The security guard (proxy) first checks:

Who are you?
Do you have permission?
Should you be allowed inside?

If everything is valid, the guard allows you to meet the CEO.

Similarly, in programming:

Client → Proxy → Real Object

The Proxy can perform authentication, logging, caching, lazy loading, etc., before accessing the real object.

Programming Example

Suppose you have:

Client → BankAccountProxy → RealBankAccount

When you call:

account.Withdraw(5000);

The Proxy may:

1. Check user permission
2. Log the transaction
3. Call the real BankAccount

An API Gateway can act as a Proxy in many scenarios.

Simple Example
Client → API Gateway → Microservice

Instead of the client directly accessing the microservice:

Client → Order Service

the client accesses it through the API Gateway:

Client → API Gateway (Proxy) → Order Service

The API Gateway can perform:

Authentication
Authorization
Rate limiting
Logging
Caching
Routing

and then forward the request to the actual microservice.

Analogy

Think of a hotel receptionist:

Guest → Receptionist → Hotel Service

You don't directly go into the hotel's internal departments. The receptionist receives your request and directs it to the appropriate service.

Similarly:

Client
   ↓
API Gateway  ← Proxy
   ↓
Microservice
Important distinction

An API Gateway can behave like a Proxy, but an API Gateway is usually more than just a Proxy.

Proxy
   ↓
Main purpose: Control/intermediate access

API Gateway
   ↓
Proxy + Routing + Authentication + Rate Limiting + Aggregation + etc.
Easy way to remember

An API Gateway is like an advanced Proxy specifically designed to manage access to backend APIs and microservices.


5. FLYWEIGHT PATTERN
------------------------

Flyweight Pattern saves memory by sharing common data between many similar objects instead of storing the same data repeatedly.

Analogy: Video Game Trees 🌳

Imagine a video game with 10,000 trees.

Each tree has:

Tree
├── Texture
├── Model
├── Color
├── Position X
└── Position Y

The Texture, Model, and Color may be identical for thousands of trees.

Without Flyweight:

Tree 1 → Texture + Model + Color + Position
Tree 2 → Texture + Model + Color + Position
Tree 3 → Texture + Model + Color + Position
...
Tree 10,000 → Texture + Model + Color + Position

You're unnecessarily storing the same heavy data thousands of times.

With Flyweight:

                 Shared Tree Data
                Texture + Model + Color
                         ↑
              ┌──────────┼──────────┐
              │          │          │
            Tree 1     Tree 2     Tree 3
             X,Y        X,Y        X,Y

Now all trees share the common heavy data, while each tree stores only its unique position.

The key idea
COMMON DATA → SHARE IT

UNIQUE DATA → STORE SEPARATELY

In design-pattern terminology:

Intrinsic state = shared/common data, such as tree texture and model.
Extrinsic state = unique data, such as each tree's X and Y position.
Easy way to remember

Flyweight = When you have a huge number of similar objects, save memory by sharing their common data.

For your design-pattern notes:

Flyweight Pattern: 
Shares common data among many similar objects to reduce memory usage. Analogy: Thousands of trees in a video game share the same texture and model, 
while each stores only its unique position.


6. FACADE PATTERN
------------------------

Facade Pattern provides one simple interface to interact with a complex system containing many classes.

Analogy: Hotel Reception 🏨

Imagine staying at a hotel.

Behind the scenes, the hotel has:

Housekeeping
Kitchen
Laundry
Maintenance
Billing
Room Service

You could contact every department individually.

You
 ├── Call Kitchen
 ├── Call Laundry
 ├── Call Housekeeping
 └── Call Maintenance

Instead, you simply call:

You
  ↓
Reception Desk (Facade)
  ↓
──────────────────────
↓        ↓       ↓
Kitchen Laundry Housekeeping

The reception desk hides the complexity of the entire hotel system and gives you one simple point of interaction.

In software

Without Facade:

var inventory = new InventoryService();
var payment = new PaymentService();
var shipping = new ShippingService();

inventory.CheckStock();
payment.ProcessPayment();
shipping.CreateShipment();

The client needs to understand and interact with all the subsystems.

With Facade:

var orderFacade = new OrderFacade();

orderFacade.PlaceOrder();

Internally:

public class OrderFacade
{
    private InventoryService inventory;
    private PaymentService payment;
    private ShippingService shipping;

    public void PlaceOrder()
    {
        inventory.CheckStock();
        payment.ProcessPayment();
        shipping.CreateShipment();
    }
}

So:

Client
   ↓
OrderFacade
   ↓
────────────────────────
↓           ↓          ↓
Inventory  Payment   Shipping
Easy way to remember

Facade = One simple front door to a complex system.

For your notes:

Facade Pattern: Provides a simplified interface to a complex subsystem. Analogy: A hotel reception desk acts as 
one point of contact instead of making guests interact with every hotel department individually.


7. DECORATOR PATTERN
-----------------------------

Decorator Pattern means adding new features or responsibilities to an object dynamically without changing its original class.

☕ Analogy: Coffee Shop

You start with a basic coffee.

Then you can decorate it with:

Coffee + Milk
Coffee + Sugar
Coffee + Whipped Cream

Each addition adds extra behavior/cost, but the original Coffee class remains unchanged.

In Programming
Basic Coffee
     ↓
Milk Decorator
     ↓
Sugar Decorator
     ↓
Whipped Cream Decorator

Each decorator wraps the previous object and adds something extra.

Simple Definition to Remember

Decorator Pattern = Wrap an object to add extra functionality without modifying its original class.

Key idea: Wrapping instead of inheritance.


CREATIONAL PATTERNS:(CREATION)
-------------------------------------   
 
1. PROTOTYPE PATTERN
----------------------- 

The Prototype Pattern creates new objects by copying (cloning) an existing object instead of creating them from scratch.

Analogy:
Think of a photocopy machine 📄.

You already have one completed document. Instead of writing the same document again from scratch, you simply make a copy and modify it if needed.

In programming:

Existing Object → Clone → New Object

Key idea:

Prototype Pattern = Create new objects by cloning existing objects.


2. SINGLETON PATTERN
-----------------------

The Singleton Pattern ensures that a class has only one object (instance) throughout the application and provides a common way to access it.

Analogy:
Think of the President of a country.

At a given time, there is only one President, and everyone who needs to communicate with the President refers to that same person.

In programming:

Application → One Shared Instance

Key idea:

Singleton Pattern = Create only one instance of a class and share it everywhere.

Singleton Pattern – Database Configuration Example

Suppose your application reads the database connection settings from appsettings.json.

You don't need to create and load a new configuration object every time a service needs the database settings. Instead, the application can create one configuration instance and share it throughout the application.

appsettings.json → One Configuration Instance → Used by Multiple Services

Analogy: Think of an office notice board. There is only one central notice board, and all employees refer to the same board for information.

Singleton = One shared instance used throughout the application.

Note: In ASP.NET Core, configuration is effectively shared application-wide, but DbContext itself is normally Scoped, not Singleton.

DbContext is the bridge between your C# application and the database in Entity Framework Core.

Analogy:
Think of DbContext as a waiter in a restaurant:

Your Application → DbContext (Waiter) → Database (Kitchen)

Your application tells DbContext:

Get me all customers.
Add this new employee.
Update this product.
Delete this order.

DbContext communicates with the database and performs these operations.

Example
public class AppDbContext : DbContext
{
    public DbSet<Customer> Customers { get; set; }
}

Then you can write:

var customers = context.Customers.ToList();

Here:

context → DbContext object
Customers → Database table
ToList() → Fetch records from the database

Key idea:

DbContext = A bridge/session between your C# application and the database.

And connecting it to your previous question: DbContext is usually Scoped, meaning one DbContext instance is created for one HTTP request.

Singleton → IConfiguration / App settings: One shared instance used throughout the application's lifetime.
Scoped → DbContext: One instance created per HTTP request.
Transient → Email service / lightweight helper service: A new instance is created every time it is requested.
Example flow
ASP.NET Core Application

Singleton  → App Configuration → One for entire application

Scoped     → DbContext         → One per HTTP request

Transient  → EmailService      → New instance every time requested


3. FACTORY PATTERN
-----------------------

The Factory Method Pattern creates objects without the client directly deciding which specific class to instantiate.

Analogy:
Think of a restaurant kitchen 🍕

You order a food item:

Order Pizza → Kitchen creates Pizza

Order Burger → Kitchen creates Burger

You don't go into the kitchen and create the food yourself. You simply specify what you want, and the kitchen decides how to create the appropriate object.

In programming:

Client → Factory Method → Creates Required Object

Key idea:

Factory Method = Delegate object creation to a method instead of creating objects directly with new.